Where do functions come from?
They are not written into the texture of the universe at the moment of the Big Bang.
Instead, functions are written by humans.
Lots of functions are written by professional developers who have years or sometimes decades of experience
with computer science and with developing libraries and functions.
But lots and lots of functions are written by like normal people like you and me.
And so in this video, I'm going to teach you how to create your own functions in Python.
This is quite useful.
You will write a lot of your own functions as you progress through Python.
Okay, so let's start with a very simple example of a function.
So I am going to write def def for define.
You can see also again another example of a reserved keyword in Python.
So here the text turns from black to blue and when I write def okay, so def and I'm going to write
awesome function because this is going to be an awesome function.
And then I have open and close parentheses for right now just use open and close parentheses with nothing
in between I we will get back to this later.
And then this is super important.
This is a colon here.
Do not mistake this for a semicolon.
It's just a regular colon.
It's two dots okay.
And then I hit enter.
Now notice what happens when I hit enter here.
Python actually automatically indented by two spaces okay.
Now when you do this on your computer it might be four spaces.
That's fine.
Python.
You can use indentation for two spaces or four spaces.
And that has the same result.
But that is different from if I do not include the colon here, then when I hit enter and then I start
typing again.
It goes to the very beginning of the line.
Okay, so again we have deaf and then I have some text here.
This is the name of the function.
Just like up here we have some is the name of the function Linspace is the name of a function.
So now we are going to define a new function.
And that function is called awesome function.
And for now no just open and close parentheses and a colon.
Press enter.
And now we can put something into our function.
So what do we want to have in our function.
Well there's nothing super interesting happening in here right now.
Let's write print.
Hi.
And then I will print one plus one okay.
So this function is going to print the string.
Hi.
And then it's going to print the result of one plus one.
And I'm pretty sure that's equal to two.
But we are going to confirm that in Python in a moment.
Okay, so I have written a function and now I go to the next code cell.
And now I can call that function.
I can write awesome function like this.
And now the question is what's going to happen when I run this code cell.
Now the answer is that I will get an error message.
And why do I get an error message?
It says awesome function is not defined.
Whenever you see an error message that says something is not defined, then it's either one of two possibilities.
One is that you are trying to call a function or a variable that really is defined, but you have a
misspelling.
Maybe you mistyped like this, or maybe you forgot some capitalization like this.
So that is one possible reason for this error message.
Another possible reason for this error message is that you wrote code, but you did not yet evaluate
it.
And that's what I did here.
So I wrote this code in this cell, but I haven't actually run this cell, so therefore Python does
not actually recognize this function.
Okay.
So I'm going to run that code cell.
And now I can call this function.
So now we get a high and two confirming my suspicion that one plus one really equals two.
Okay.
Now you know why is this useful.
Well, you know, we can call this function as often as we want.
And now notice that I no longer need to write out the two lines of code.
Print hi and print one plus one.
I can just call this function now in this little simple toy example.
Awesome as it is.
Uh, you know, this is not so necessary to have a function here, right?
But imagine that we have dozens of lines of code, maybe a couple hundred lines of code, and we want
to repeat that multiple times.
So that is a situation where you really need to have a function that you define.
Okay.
One more thing I want to show you before making this function a little bit more complicated, is that
if you just call the name of the function like this without parentheses, you will get a funny looking
result here that just repeats the function name and it.
Well, if we had a docstring in here, then it would give us the help text for this function.
So this is actually just giving us information about the function.
If you want to call the function or run all the code that's contained inside the function, then you
need to have the parentheses here.
Okay.
So now I want to do something else I want to write here print.
Let's write print 17.4 something like that.
Okay.
Now when I run this code then you see the output 17.4.
And now when I run this cell here I only get hi two.
Why do I not see 17.4 four.
In this code cell, the reason is that Python knows how to start and end the definition of the function
according to the colon, which is the start of the function, and also the spacing which will define
the body of the function.
So notice the spacing here.
This is two spaces here.
And here I have no spaces.
Okay.
So this means that Python recognizes that this is the body of the function.
And then when I get out here to this line there's no more space.
Now this is not about the vertical space okay.
We can also do this and get the same result.
So it's about the horizontal spacing not the vertical spacing.
Vertical spacing is great for us to read and interpret this.
You can even do something like this.
End of function definition.
This is great for your understanding of the code.
And then we can go back up here like this.
But Python is defining the function body according to the horizontal spaces that come after the colon.
So this is part of the function.
And of course if we would put in more spaces like this now we are going to get 17.4 because of these
additional spaces in here because of this tab indent okay.
So that's our awesome function.
I will keep that forever.
Just kidding.
I will keep that until the end of this video I guess.
Let's make a new function I'm going to call this function add two numbers.
Now this is going to look slightly different from this function.
Here I'm going to say print uh in one plus in two okay.
Now what I want to do I want this to be in not int okay.
What I want this to do is take in two numbers as inputs and give me the sum, or print out the sum of
those two numbers.
So let's try this.
So I run this code cell to uh to create this function.
And actually I'll just keep working inside this code cell okay.
So now I'm going to call this function add two numbers exactly like how I showed you uh to call this
function here awesome function.
But now we get an error.
No surprise.
The variable in one is not defined.
Now, in this case, we don't have a problem with capitalization or anything like that.
Instead, uh, this really is an undefined variable.
Okay, so I want to give two inputs.
What I want is something like this four comma five.
So I want to provide two inputs into this function.
And the function will add those two inputs together and then print the result.
But this still doesn't work.
So here we get an error message that says takes zero positional arguments, but two were given.
What does this mean?
So this function takes in zero arguments.
What is an argument?
An argument is kind of an old school term for an input.
So zero arguments but two were given.
So I provided two inputs.
And yet the function definition states zero inputs.
Okay.
So what we do here is write in one comma in two.
So now Python will associate this first input with this variable and this second input with this variable.
And now I run this code cell and I get an output of nine.
And why do I get nine.
Because four plus five is nine.
Okay.
And because we're just using the plus sign here.
These don't necessarily need to be numbers.
So I can write hello.
And over here I can write Space World, and then I get an output of Hello World because we are applying
the plus sign to strings, which does string concatenation.
As you know from the previous video and earlier videos, some functions can also provide outputs.
So how do we do that?
Okay, so what I am going to do here is add to this function a calculation.
This is going to be the sum I'll call this the sum equals n1 plus n2.
And then I'm going to provide an output using the return reserved keyword.
Again it's turn.
It's changing color as I finish typing.
So return the sum okay.
So now let's see.
Let's get this back to numbers.
I'll just say three three and four.
Like this okay.
So now when I call this function I provide these two inputs.
It no longer prints any information.
Instead, it's going to give an output.
And that output is going to be one number, which is the sum of the two inputs.
So I can run this and I get a result seven and now I can write here result equals uh the output of this
function.
And then I'll check this result okay.
And then the result is seven okay.
So now actually I think I will I'm going to make some uh more significant changes.
So I also want to change the name of this function.
Let's call this uh my function.
Still going to take two inputs.
And now I'm going to, uh, have an additional calculation in this function called the prod for product.
So in one times in two.
Now when I run this again let me see.
This is now called my function.
I'm still only getting the answer of seven.
I'm only getting an output of seven.
And what does that mean.
That means that this calculation was actually run.
So Python really did multiply these two numbers, but it just didn't do anything.
This is an internal calculation and it was not given as an output.
And so the calculation happened.
But then it's gone.
It's no longer appears in our lovely universe.
And you can see this by writing out the product.
And now this product is not defined.
This variable was really created inside this function.
But as soon as we exited this function, the scope of this function was destroyed, meaning that variable
name is deleted.
The variable no longer exists, but we do want that function.
So how do we get multiple outputs?
Well, you might think of doing something like this, but this is only going to still give us the number
seven.
Because basically this line of code runs and then Python just exits the function.
This is also really bad programming.
You shouldn't do something like this.
Okay, so instead we can put a comma in here.
And then this output is going to be in the form of a variable type called a tuple okay.
So now what you see I have the sum and the prod.
And now I call this function.
And now I get both.
So seven is three plus four and 12 is the second output which is three times four okay.
So this result is now a two elements.
And what is this type of variable.
So you can see it has parentheses.
So it's not a list right.
Lists have square brackets.
This result has parentheses.
So let's see.
This is of type tuple.
A tuple is like a list.
It's almost the same thing as a list.
The main difference is that lists are what's called mutable, which means you can change the values
of a list.
A tuple is immutable, which means you cannot change the values of the list.
So for example, we cannot write.
So we can still index like this.
But we cannot change the result here because the tuple does not support item assignment, which basically
means that once you have a tuple, you cannot change the information in a tuple, but otherwise a tuple
and a list are basically the same kind of variable.
Okay.
Very nice.
Let's say we only want to access the first element of this result.
Or maybe we want to separate them into two different variables instead of one variable.
So let's call this result s for sum and result p for prod for product.
So now you can see I have a function with two inputs and it provides two outputs.
And each of those outputs is just a single number corresponding to the sum and the product.
So let's review what I have taught you about functions.
You create your own functions in Python using the def keyword for define.
After def you have a space in here and then the name of the function.
And you always need open and close parentheses.
If you have inputs then you list those inputs.
The variable names of those inputs here inside the parentheses.
If you don't need any inputs then you still need the parentheses, but you just leave it empty in between.
After the parentheses you need a colon.
And this tells Python that everything after the colon is the body or the definition of the function.
And then after the colon, you need every line that is inside the function to have either two spaces
or four spaces.
It doesn't actually matter whether it's two spaces or four spaces, but it needs to be consistent within
the code.
So this you cannot do.
You can see uh, Python or Jupyter Notebook is already giving me lots of red lines.
So everything has to be with two spaces or with four spaces, but not a mix.
Okay.
And then, uh, all of the code that is inside the body of the function is indented.
And then if you want to provide outputs to give outside the function the result of your calculations,
you use the keyword return.
And then you list all of the outputs okay.
And then that's it.
Then when the function is finished you have no more spaces.
So you go back in indentation to the beginning of the code.
So this is one way to define a function.
In Python.
These are sometimes called named functions or standard functions in Python, and that you can contrast
with what I will now show you, which is called a lambda expression, which is also sometimes called
a lambda function, and it's also sometimes called an anonymous function.
Now I have to say these are my least favorite terms to call these named functions and anonymous functions,
because they're both named.
So I call these you know, I think it's better to call these standard functions and call these lambda
expressions.
Anyway, the idea is that this takes up lots of lines of code, which is great if you have a long function,
but sometimes you have a short little function that you only need a little bit of code for really just
one line of code.
And then you can create a lambda expression or a lambda function.
And I'll call that little fun as an example equals lambda.
Again look at this keyword here.
It's reserved keyword.
It changes color x.
uh, colon.
And then I don't know, let's do like x squared minus one or something like that.
Okay.
So what I have done here is create a function where it takes as input x.
And the function is defined by this little expression here.
So I hope you can see actually what I think I will do is write uh rewrite this function using standard
def format.
So def little Fun2 x and then return x squared minus one.
Okay.
These two expressions are exactly the same.
They take the same input and they calculate the same number and they provide the same output.
Uh I think you can see that this is a nice formulation.
If you have just a really quick little function that you want to work with, and then this does not
support multiple lines of code.
If you need more than one line of code to express your function, you don't use a lambda expression.
You use a standard function, a regular function.
Okay.
And then, you know, we can just provide input.
So little fun for okay.
So four squared minus one is 15 okay.
And then we can confirm that we get the same result here.
That concludes this video on functions.
Once you get deeper into Python knowledge you will discover additional things you can include in functions,
additional ways of defining functions and working with functions.
And that's all fine.
But this is the basic uh, this is basically all you need to know about functions for certainly for
this course.
And just writing out functions like this with inputs and outputs and calculations in between, that
will get you very far in Python coding.